'\" et
.EQ
delim $$
.EN
.TH lists_tmac 7 "December 2017"
.SH NAME
.BR lists.tmac \c
\ \(em A macro package for exceptionally well-typeset lists in Troff.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SS Bulleted lists
.LP
The following synopsis shows general macros available for typesetting bulleted
lists.
.SY .{b
.OP chr
.OP hsp
.OP vsp
.YS
.SY .}b
.YS
.SY .bb
.OP chr
.OP hsp
.OP vsp
.YS
.SS Totally ordered lists
.LP
The following synopsis shows general macros available for typesetting totally
ordered (lexicographically ordered) lists.
.SY .{o
.OP toset
.OP delim
.OP depth
.OP depth_hsp
.OP hsp
.OP vsp
.YS
.SY .}o
.YS
.SY .oo
.OP depth
.OP toset
.OP delim
.OP depth_hsp
.OP hsp
.OP vsp
.YS
.SY .rnl
.RI [ n ] \|.\|.\|.
.YS
.LP
Note that only commonly-used, general typesetting macros are listed in the
.SB SYNOPSIS.
These macros will not be detailed within this manual page, but within the manual
page to which they pertain.
This manual page only describes the general entirety of the macro package.
.LP
Macros available for further tweaking and numerical registers for internal usage
are not generally used or are unsafe for novices, and thus do not appear in this
section of the manual.
However, they will be detailed later on as a caveat/subtlety within their
respective parts of their respective manual pages.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
In this section lies the general description of the macro package, not specific
to any type of list.
For a more casual and succinct rendition of this information, refer to
.UR README.rst
the README.rst file
.UE
in the Git repository.
.SS What it is
.LP
.B lists.tmac
is a macro package that facilitates the typesetting of exceptionally beautiful
lists within Troff and Nroff.
It can do bulleted and totally ordered (lexicographically ordered) lists with
arbitrary complexity.
The entire package is free and open-source and is written in 100% pure Troff
with no other programming languages involved whatsoever.
The source code and project base can be found on
.UR https://github.com/katt64/lists.tmac
its Github repository
.UE .
.LP
It aims to do one thing and do it very well: lists, lists, lists!
Everything has been made to work well out-of-the-box and just look good, from
the source code up to the documentation.
It is also designed to be fun to use and maintain as well, whilst being
very powerful.
.LP
Keep in mind that development for \fBlists.tmac\fP is aimed specifically at
Troff output, not Nroff output, but it does work with Nroff as the two use the
same document formatting language.
As such, there is no guarantee that output in Nroff will look as good as that of
Troff.
.LP
Inspiration was taken from lists within reStructuredText documents.
reStructuredText can set bulleted and lexicographical lists of many nested
orders and depths, but that is about all it can do.
This macro package brings this feature home to Troff and extends it a lot
further with many features only available thanks to Troff's versatility.
.LP
As such,
.B lists.tmac
extends the capabilities of any builtin bulleted and totally ordered list
macro(s) provided by reStructuredText and the classical macro packages,
especially the \fI-me\fP macros.
This is done by giving the writer full control over the setting of lists,
providing means for \fIinfinitely many\fP nested orders (lists of lists) and
depths (deeper numbers) of lists each of which can be customized individually,
and a few more fancy things.
This is provided whilst also maintaining a certain amount of convenience by
automating things with good-looking general defaults so that the writer need not
fuss about the little details if it is not necessary.
Some errors can also be handled with grace under fire with little to no
banter on the standard error.
.LP
To induce a bit of nostalgia for the writers, the macro package is designed with
a look-and-feel that blends in with other classical macro packages, especially
the \fI-me\fP macros.
To clarify, the macros provided by \fBlists.tmac\fP should look good and blend
in with the macros provided by \fI-me\fP.
As such, this means that macro names are generally terse;
macros that are most frequently used are terser than the ones that aren't.
Luckily enough, the situation is better in \fBlists.tmac\fP as some occasionally
used macros are 3 characters long excluding the beginning dot (.)
.SS What it is not
.LP
.B lists.tmac
is not a replacement for an entire macro package; it is intended to be used
.I in tandem with
other macro packages.
It can only do lists, nothing else.
Technically, it does provide facilities for a few common paragraphing styles,
but it is only to be used within list contexts.
As such, if it were coerced into completely replacing an entire macro package
such as \fI-me\fP, there will be no facilities for sections, fancy paragraphs,
footnotes, title lines, adequate margins, &c.
.LP
If fancy lists with many orders and depths of nestings are not desired, one
should \fInot\fP be using this macro package, so as to keep things simple.
.B lists.tmac
is a very big and highly complex beast in typesetting, but not as big on average
as some general macro packages.
When it is used within a Troff document, it defines a \fIfucking shitload\fP
of macros and numerical registers of its own in a recursive manner; a rough
count gives at least 76 macros and 23 numerical registers initially.
It must be this way because of the features and customizability it aims to
provide.
As such, if your needs can be satisifed with just your default macro package,
don't use
.B lists.tmac.
On the other hand, if you must have fancy lists, use it like there is no
tomorrow.
.SH INSTALLATION
.LP
Before installation, make sure that you have a compatible Troff compiler.
Currently, known compilers that work with this macro package are:
.IP \(bu 2m
GNU TROFF
.IP \(bu
Heirloom TROFF
.LP
If your compiler seems not to be compatible, a fatal error will occur and all
document processing stops at that instant.
.LP
The entire repository for the macro package which includes the macro files
themselves, manual pages, license information, some other information, and some
other things can be fetched through Github into a directory.
Once obtained, be sure to read the
.UR LICENSE
4-clause BSD license information
.UE
and get acquainted with the
.UR README.rst
README
.UE
before continuing.
.LP
Optionally, one can check to make sure that all
.SM TMAC
source files have not been compromised by making sure that all commits are
signed by their proclaimed authors.
This usually shows as a green \m[green]Verified\m[] tag enclosed in a box when
one views the information about the commit.
We never accept developers who do not sign their commits and unsigned commits
are rejected.
Also optional, one can check that their cloned copy of the repository is
legitimate by verifying the
.SM SHA512
checksums of each and every
.SM TMAC
file.
.LP
Finally, simply copy all the
.SM TMAC
files (i.e. files that end with a \fC.tmac\fP extension) from the repository and
put them in your \fCsite-tmac\fP directory, which is usually in
\fC/usr/share/groff/site-tmac\fP.
Check with your local system administrator or do a quick look-through to check
where this folder really is before copying.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.LP
Configuration is generally done within the Troff document on which the writer is
working on \fIafter\fP the macro package is loaded.
Any configuration will be overwritten by the defaults with no forewarnings if it
is done before the macro package is loaded.
.LP
Configuration is done by setting appropriate numerical registers to the desired
values.
These numerical registers are specific to the types of lists (bulleted and
totally ordered) and are thus documented in their respective manual pages, not
in here.
They are also documented, albeit succinctly, in the
.SM TMAC
source files to which they pertain.
.SH EXAMPLES
.LP
Examples and their corresponding Troff source can generally be found in the
manual page
.B lists_tmac_ex\fR(7)\fR.
There, features and caveats will also be detailed along with all the figures.
Only practical examples will be seen even if the macro package can generally
offer more customizability.
As such, it is not a reference manual for \fIall\fP use cases.
.LP
It may be best to view that manual page in Troff (on a graphical window on X)
and not Nroff (on the terminal).
This can be done by issuing the following variant of the \fIman\fP command which
will give you Postscript output on standard output, from which you can pipe to
your favourite PDF viewer like \fBzathura\fP(1) or save to a file.
.RS
.EX
man -Tps 7 lists_tmac_ex
.EE
.RE
.LP
Another good but very basic example of \fBlists.tmac\fP usage can be found in
\(sc An example \f[EMOJIR]🙈\f[] of
.UR README.rst
the main README file
.UE .
There, one will find a comparison between the typeset output of Troff (not
Nroff) and the inspirer of \fBlists.tmac\fP, reStructuredText.
The source code for the Troff output can also be found there.
It can be tried out on your setup if you have \fBlists.tmac\fP installed.
.LP
For more detailed or complete examples, see the reference manual page for each
type of list \fBlists.tmac\fP provides.
.SH ERRORS
.LP
In this section, only errors that are general to the entire macro package are
documented.
For errors specific to a type of list, consult their respective manual pages.
.LP
Error messages always take a form representable by the following regular
expression.
Pay close attention on the capture groups in parentheses ().
.RS
.EX
(FATAL|ERROR|WARNING|INFO) \e((.+)\e): (.+)
.EE
.RE
.LP
The following table shows what each capture group represents.
Within the \fICapture\fP column, text that is set in \fRroman\fP typeface
signifies an exact match, whereas text that is set in \fIitalics\fP signifies a
more abstract idea of a match.
.TS
center allbox tab(:) ;
cb cb cb
li l lw30 .
Capture group:Capture:Meaning
\e1:FATAL:T{
An error occurred and it was so fatal that the macro package cannot continue and
must abruptly abort all text processing when the error is found.
T}
\^:ERROR:T{
An error occurred during text processing and it was quite bad.
Text processing can continue, but don't expect the output to look as desired.
T}
\^:WARNING:T{
Either the macro package had a misfortunate faux pas whilst typesetting or the
writer gave the macro package a preposterous task.
T}
\^:INFO:T{
The macro package is giving some information on what is going to happen that may
or may not seem surprising.
It is simply for the writer's information.
T}
\e2:\fIfilename\fP:T{
The filename, excluding the path, of the macro file responsible for this noise.
This is given so that the situation can easily be traced back to a specific
feature or a specific type of list responsible for the havoc.
T}
\e3:\fIsome error message\fP:T{
An succinct description of the problem is given here so the nature of the
problem is known.
T}
.TE
.sp
.LP
What follows is a list of possible errors in the general context of the macro
package.
.TP
.I FATAL (lists.tmac): Not compatible outside GNU/Heirloom TROFF.
The macro package is not compatible if it is not used with either GNU or
Heirloom versions of Troff.
.br
This is generally because of some macro definitions whose names consist of more
than two characters excluding the dot (.), some numerical registers whose
names consist of more than two characters, and some control flow constructs
available only in the modern implementations of Troff.
.br
After reading the
.SM TMAC
source files, if you are certain that your implementation of Troff supports
these fancy things, then remove the 9th line of the \(lqlists.tmac\(rq file.
If you stubbornly do this without making sure your implementation has what it
takes, then your typeset output may look like shit.
.br
Once this error is encountered, document processing terminates, hence the
.SB FATAL
nature.
.LP
As of today, there is only one possible error that could be emitted by the
entire \fBlists.tmac\fP macro package and it is the one above.
This goes to demonstrate the self-rectifying abilities the macro package
generally posesses and also demonstrate the laissez-faire attitude specific to
the author(s).
.LP
If you think a message could be related to a bug, even if distantly, please feel
free to report it.
See
.SB BUGS
for how they can be reported.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.LP
Within the
.SM TROFF
typesetting environment of the document, some numerical registers have their
values inherited from the \fI-me\fP macros if the \fI-me\fP macros have been
sourced before this macro package, but those such numerical registers will be
set to a sensible default if otherwise.
The \(lqsensible default\(rq is the same default provided by the \fI-me\fP
macros anyway.
.LP
Strictly speaking, these numerical registers will be defined by \fBlists.tmac\fP
if and only if they have not been defined before this macro package is sourced,
but are left untouched otherwise.
.LP
It is relatively rare for a numerical register in this macro package to behave
this way, but it is put there when a convenience is seen fit.
This then goes to demonstrate how the macro package attempts to integrate with
an existing macro package setting if any, and change it otherwise.
.LP
Numerical registers that behave this way notably include:
.IP \(bu 2m
\fI\en(ps\fP \(em Default vertical spacing between paragraphs inside list
contexts.
Defaults to $4200u$ if undefined.
.IP \(bu
\fI\en(pi\fP \(em Default temporary indent for left-indented paragraphs.
Defaults to $25000u$ if undefined.
.LP
It can be seen now that these numerical registers coincide with what the
\fI-me\fP macro uses.
So change them with care if they must be changed at all.
.SH FILES
In the following table, files that are important to the functionality of
.B lists.tmac
are listed along with a short description of what they are and what they depend
on.
These files all end with a \fI.tmac\fP extension as they are macro files written
in Troff, for Troff.
.TS
box ;
ci ci ci
li lw30 lw30 .
Name	Description	Dependencies
_
arrays.tmac	T{
A manual and minimalistic implementation of a JavaScript-\:style array for
Troff.
T}	\-
bul.tmac	T{
Macros for bulleted lists
T}	arrays.tmac
lists.tmac	T{
A wrapper macro file that loads all important macro definitions in one go.
T}	T{
arrays.tmac,\:bul.tmac,\:ordered.tmac,\:paragraphs.tmac
T}
ordered.tmac	T{
Macros for ordered lists
T}	arrays.tmac
paragraphs.tmac	T{
Specialized macros for common paragraphs within the context of a list
environment.
T}	\-
.TE
.LP
Please note that you will generally want to source \fIlists.tmac\fP so as to
source all other macro files in the table above, so that all necessary and spare
features are ready at your disposal at anytime.
Only play around with which files to include if you are confident in your skills
in Troff.
A case in point, \fIarrays.tmac\fP is almost always required on the low-level
scheme of things no matter what type of list you are trying to set.
.LP
Because of the importance of all these files, they are the only files listed
in the SHA512SUM checklist.
.LP
Files in the repository like README.rst and LICENSE are for you to read but
obviously do not affect the functionality of the macro package.
Other files like sed.arraysrm, &c. are miscellaneous files for maintainers that
have their own self-descriptive information.
Ignoring them is generally fine, unless you are maintaining the macro package.
.SH VERSIONS
.LP
.B lists.tmac
is provided as-is.
There are no versions and the package is released by date and time, only
branches in the Git repository as necessary.
In essence, the release model is very similar to that of a rolling-release with
the cutting-edge always provided.
.LP
You are very likely to want to use the \fImaster\fP branch of this package, as
it is deemed the most stable as far as the testing eye can see.
Should uncertainty occur, feel free to ask the author(s) what branch/release
should be used for your use case.
.LP
As for documentation, time and effort is taken to reflect those changes within
the appropriate portions of the manual pages.
However, this is provided without the guarantee that the features in the macro
package and its details in the manual page are in perfect synchrony.
Mistakes can happen and facts can inadvertently be omitted; if such happens,
please help us correct the manual pages.
By all means, \fIalways\fP correct the manual pages to keep up with the macros,
.I do not
remove features from the macros in an attempt synchronize with the manual pages!
.SH BUGS
.SS Known bugs
.LP
None thus far!
.if t .ft EMOJIR
😇🙈
.if t .ft
.SS Reporting bugs
.LP
If there are bugs, please do make an effort to report to
.UR https://github.com/katt64/lists.tmac/issues
the issues page
.UE
no matter how trivial, or even try to fix them yourself if you can and then
create a pull request.
.LP
If you cannot fix them yourself, don't worry: just file a bug report.
However, do be sure that you are running the latest release of the macros before
reporting any bugs.
.LP
Bug reports can be however trivial they must be, but keep in mind that they must
be detailed enough such that the maintainers know what exactly is going on.
Therefore, it is generally recommended to include the following things in your
bug report in the following order:
.IP 1. 3m
The abstract of the problem you are facing.
For example:
.RS 5m
Bulleted lists are suddenly not nesting properly after 37 nested orders on
the 2nd and 3rd items of the list.
.RE
.IP 2.
The Troff source text that clearly exemplifies and isolates the bugs.
The bugs should be reproducible given this mere excerpt.
Doing this isolation is useful so that it is not necessary to show your entire
document to the public and it is easy for the maintainers to look for the bugs
without getting too distracted.
For example:
.RS 5m
.EX
\&.{b \(mu
\&.bb
This is nesting well.
\&.bb
This is not; the margin falls back.
\&.bb
This is not doing well either.
\&.bb
This is okay.
Strange!
\&.}b
.EE
.RE
.IP 3.
The backtrace of the macro package's operation on the excerpt from No. 2.
This is very useful so it is further known what's going on whilst the document
and the list is being compiled and typeset onto the page.
A very good backtrace can be printed to the Standard Error stream by adding the
following lines \fBafter\fP the line to source the macro package.
So, the top of the example excerpt from No. 2 should look like this:
.RS 5m
.EX
\&.mso lists.tmac
\&.nr trace-full 1
\&.mso trace.tmac
\&.{b
\&.bb
This is nesting well.
.RE
.EE
You may be asked to put the two lines (\fC.nr trace-full 1\fP and \fC.mso
trace.tmac\fP) \fBbefore\fP the line to source the macro package (\fC.so
lists.tmac\fP).
If that's the case, you may want to do that.
.IP 4.
The name and version of your Troff compiler, and related environment factors
such as fonts, font sizes, page sizes, even the operating system, &c.
This could be helpful.
For example:
.RS 5m
I'm running GNU Troff version 1.22.2 on Gentoo Linux x86_64.
I'm using Merriweather size 10 on 12.
The paper size is US Letter.
I'm also using EQN and TBL for equations and tables respectively.
.RE
.LP
All this information could be very useful in hunting down bugs and finding the
root cause of the problem.
Remember to collect all you can!
.LP
This subsection will \fInot\fP be mentioned again for the respective types of
list.
If a bug pertains only to a type of list, this bug reporting procedure shall be
used.
.SH AUTHORS
.LP
Stephanie Björk (Katt) has been writing the macro package and manual
pages documenting its aspects since the start of December 2017.
She decided on the license for this package \(em the 4-clause BSD.
.LP
She can be contacted by
.MT katt16777216@gmail.com
email
.ME
or added on Snapchat by the username, \fCsuttiwit\fP.
.LP
Currently, there are no other authors involved.
This section will be updated to reflect any changes without prior notice.
.LP
This macro package is a wonderful and miraculous thing that really deserves some
maintanance.
As of the time of writing, the author is a 17-year-old high school student
aiming to further her education as a computer scientist in a university.
The amount of school work, exam pressures, family expectations, and a full
bucket list generally leads to stress and depression.
So, more maintainers are really appreciated.
If you would like to volunteer, contact her with your background pertaining to
computer science and programming and some reasons why this project interests
you.
.LP
For succinctness, hereafter read \fII, me, my, mine\fP as referring the author
herself.
.LP
In no particular order, I would like to thank the following people from the
groff mailing list community for their advice and suggestions:
.IP \(bu 2m
Pierre-Jean, for suggesting that the macro package works with Hierloom Troff;
.IP \(bu
Steffen Nurpmeso, for suggesting that the stack implementation should be
extended to support the storage of strings;
.IP \(bu
and Ralph Corderoy, for
.UR http://troff.org
his website
.UE ,
without which I would not have known of Troff.
.LP
I would like to give special thanks to James Clark, Wener Lemberg, and Ted
Harding for developing Groff; and Professor Brian W. Kernighan who guided me
through Troff in the beginning stages.
.LP
Last but not least, I would like to specifically thank the following persons in
no particular order:
.IP \(bu 2m
my mother, for her patience with me as I spent countless hours trying to get the
macro package working, not least for without her, this macro package may not
have existed;
.IP \(bu \" Bjørk doesn't reply to my texts sometimes.  It really fucks me up.
Bjørk, for saving my life and for her unwavering support every step of the
way, not least for without her, this macro package may not have existed;
.IP \(bu
Francesca, for further guidance in the later stages of Troff with the
\(lqprogramming\(rq features, and also for valuable help with some excerpts of
source code;
.IP \(bu
and you \(em yes, you brave little thing who dares to try out my macro package:
thank you for having hope in me and the things I write.
.LP
The fact that the list and paragraphs on top consist of persons who are all men
and the list at the bottom consist of persons who are all women (maybe not you)
is purely coincidental and by chance.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IP \(bu 2m
.B lists_tmac_ex\fR(7)\fR
\(em basic examples of \fBlists.tmac\fP usage and their source code.
.IP \(bu
.B lists_tmac_bul\fR(7)\fR
\(em reference manual page for bulleted lists set by the macro package.
.IP \(bu
.B lists_tmac_ord\fR(7)\fR
\(em reference manual page for totally ordered lists set by the macro package.
.IP \(bu
.UR README.rst
The main README file
.UE
if you have not read it yet since you cloned this repository.
